Hello community. So great that you are
back. Today we have a look inside the
black box of artificial intelligence
because we have some brand new research
that we now know much better. What is
inside the black box? Now last time when
we talked about quantum eye and a
quantum kernel advantage here when we
talked about our hilbert spaces it was a
little bit complicated but today it will
be rather simple. You see here February
2025 MIT a beautiful paper told us not
all language model features are
one-dimensional linearly. So this means
they had a look here at LLM's perform
computation by manipulating
one-dimensional representation of the
features in the activation space and
they explore whether some language model
representations may be inherently
multi-dimensional.
So let's continue in this MIT just more
than a year ago. We found that if you do
a PCA, we have here for example the days
in a week here in a circle or if we go
here the month and a year also in a
circle. So we found symmetries more more
higher multi-dimensional symmetries. But
today we want to go of course the next
step and the next step is simple. So
just to make clear where we are here in
a mathematical space. No. So you know in
a classical transform architecture for
every single token the model here
processes here let's say the word
Tuesday. So this means the network now
computes here 496dimensional
vector representation if you think about
a llama model. So it contains here the
superposed sum of everything the model
knows about the current context in this
vector. And now imagine we record this
state vector X, call it just X, over
millions of other different prompts. And
we ask them well now about some
particular terms like Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, and you immediately
understand what we're interested in.
Huh? And we map all those points in the
4,000 dimensional space.
What do we expect to see? Well, we will
not see some random clouds, but we also
do not see orthogonal straight lines. So
what we see and this is interesting. We
see a smooth continuous one-dimensional
ring representation in this
highdimensional space. Think about this
is a one-dimensional feature in a
4,000dimensional vector space. And if
you open the black box further today
we're going to have a look at if you
look at how years are represented 2025
2026 they are internal represented here
and computed here by a three-dimensional
helix structure in this high dimensional
[clears throat] space. So the internal
representation how the AI prepares the
data for its own computing here has
symmetry has a clear structure and this
is the beauty in understanding here
further how does the blackbox LLM here
really function and compute now if you
are physicist or you know a little bit
about physics you say hey the LLM
Hamiltonians has learned here that
reality contains continuous symmetries
now so consequently it's data vectors,
let's call them X again, are constrained
to live on lowdimensional submanifolds.
But there's a catch and LM doesn't just
think about one thing at a time. No, you
know that this vector representation of
X is an additive mixture of manifolds.
Let's say for example the term cold
Tuesday. So the state vector here is the
vector sum of a point of the temperature
manifold and a point on the manifold
here for the day manifold. So
mathematically x now lives here in the
minkovski sum of these manifolds. So you
see yes we do leave our if you wantian
spaces behind us. We have to go now if
we want to understand more about the
blackboxi, we have to go to higher
mathematical vector spaces that we know
for for a long long time, hundreds of
years. But we have to say goodbye to the
very simplest mathematicals room like a
nucleidian space.
So why we did not continue to make
progress with AI? you can say is we were
simply using ukitian tools trying to
understand what's happening inside the
black box to measure a non- ukitian
universe but now let's change this let's
say okay we do have the mathematical
tools and let's have a look at this now
the very first tool that you know and
just two days ago I showed you in a
video we going to use sparse
autoenccoder here as a tool so what is
it it is fundamentally a dictionary
learning algorithm for us no it takes
here this particular state vector X here
in 4K and tries now to reconstruct it
here on a particular basis and this
basis let's call it D here is an
overcomplete dictionary no D this means
it is nothing else than a vast set of
rigid straight basis vectors that we
know also from three dimensional no and
our set I components here for this
representation of the vector X in this
sparse autoenccoder is now a highly
sparse set of coefficients. So we really
want to find we have here somewhere a
particular vector and we want simply to
reconstruct here given here a particular
base here now the highly sparse
coefficient. So then we understand
exactly what are the features that are
encoded here in this mathematical space.
Now you know of course here what happens
when you try to describe a curved
surface and let's take the surface of
the planet earth. Yeah. If you were to
say hm okay I want to map the earth this
is here you know a sphere and we use
just this flat rigid plane our tool is
not now a multi-dimensional manifold but
a flat rigid plane you cannot do it here
with a single global map without some
horrific distortion and you see this
really in category if you look at some
maps you have especially if you go here
to the pole regions you do have some
geometric distortions and exactly this
is what is happening here in our 4,000
dimensional vector space that we work
with EI and to map now a manifold
without those distortion you know a
differential geometer know we have now
more mathematical tools know that we can
use it constructs now here an atlas it's
an atlas here made of many overlapping
local js now you can say an atlas yes I
remember this from school. No, you had a
lot of pages here and you saw the
geometry here of all the different
states here on the planet and the
surface of the earth. But you can
understand atlas here as a term in
differential geometry in pure
mathematics and we talk about the second
one. So we will have local charge. They
have a mathematical definition. And then
we will have here the idea that we will
have to construct an atlas with
overlapping regions. And you are not
going to believe it but our mathematical
tool of a sparse autoenccoder will build
an atlas for us if we do a mathematical
optimization theorem on this. So it is
absolutely fascinating what happens
inside of an AI blackbox. Now let's have
a look here and this is obviously the
new study here from end of end of April
2026.
If we have a particular manifold let's
say we have colors you want to describe
colors in a blackbox AI. Now it turns
out it is a paraboluid.
Temperature is a line. H is a line.
Geography is a hierarchical tree. As I
told you, the days is a circle, a
one-dimensional circle in 4,000
dimension. The years will be a helix in
three dimension. Formality is align
political bias. You will have continuous
manifolds. So we found out that whatever
we think in the human language of like
days and years and and age they have
different geometric representation in
the black box of AI. But now that we
understand how this is encoded by AI, we
know exactly what we have to look for.
This is color. Color in a
4,96dimensional
room. But of course you have two
components, two primary components. No,
you have here the lightness gradient and
here the u circumference. Yeah. So you
see if we go here for color parabolu.
Okay. Here we have it. And now you
understand if we go now in the
mathematical tangent space and not
anymore in the simple ukidian space we
understand that we have now local
charts. And from those local charts we
can build an atlas. And this will help
us now as an advanced mathematical tool
to understand what is happening now
inside the blackbox. the eye
dictionary atoms. Yeah, I have to
explain if you are not in mathematics
and you have not a PhD uh some of the
terms. So relax, we just have a look at
some terms.
Now imagine [clears throat] and let's
make it funny. You are an MLM and your
universe right up till now is nothing.
It's a vacuum. You have not been trained
on anything. And then suddenly some
crazy human person comes and feeds you
let's say three trillion words the copy
of the internet or whatever of human
text no every Wikipedia every physics
textbook all the books in the world and
now you are tasked as an LLM with one
law of physics now predict the next
token based on a probability
distribution of all your pre-training
data. This is your job as an LLM. Huh?
So what does it means? If you have a
look at mathematical, you must discover
now the underlying invariance that
generate here the human language. So in
the simplest case, let's take an
example. You must now deduce that
apples, the term apples or the term fire
engine or the term stop signals all
share a hidden statistical property like
I showed you with color and age that
dictates how the word behave around them
because you have to predict now the next
word. So you have to understand here the
semantic surroundness here of your
particular keywords. Easy. It's a
statistical property. We can calculate
this. This is not a problem. Yeah.
Now there's a terminology. So let's get
used to this for the hidden statistical
properties. This is what we used to call
a concept. So what is it? A concept is
something a little bit more higher
complexity. Ler the color red. It is a
concept. French grammar is a concept.
Sarcasm or the year 1945.
They're all concepts that we want to
understand. and you as an LLM have also
to compute with.
Now it turns out that those concepts are
the true latent variables. Now if you
want a degree of freedom if you see it
here as a multi-body problem here of the
human data generating process no and
there are thousand let's say millions of
abstract ideas that are woven into the
human language into the human text. No.
And now your job as a little LLM is to
deduct all those concepts. No, my
goodness. But there's a problem. You as
an LLM, you have now only your hidden
space, vector space here in the hidden
layers of your transform architecture.
And you only have a 4,000 dimensional
state space. And now you sh to discover
millions of abstract idea in the human
text from the internet.
So you say okay then I have here the
princip principle thing of
superposition. No the llm embeds now all
those concept millions of it into a
4,000 dimensional state space.
So those are not pure states. No. So we
open up the llm and pull out a list of
those exact concepts. No because we want
to understand what did the little llm
really learn. So we build now or take
our measuring device that we already
have here. If you're an EI expert, the
sparse autoenccoder
and because we suspect the model has
learned tens of thousands of concepts.
No, we designer our sparse autoenccoder
to have let's go with the classical one
65,000 dictionary atoms or overcomplete
frame vectors. Again, technical terms
that are unfortunately mixed up a little
bit, but we have to be clear. So, we go
a dictionary. An atom is simply a row of
a matrix D. And therefore, it is itself
a mathematical vector or you can call
the 65 case here elements here frames,
frame vectors, because they build a
complete frame. But since it is 65,000
and we have a 4,000 dimensional space,
it is an overcomplete frame for the
dimensionality of the mathematical space
that we operate in in 4,000 dimension.
Therefore, it is overcomplete frame to
vector. Beautiful. Now we know the
terms. So the job of this bars
autoenccoder is now for us to take note
the dense tangled 496dimensional
state tractor of our physical system.
Let's say an LLM and you know exactly
what we do. We blow it up. We map it now
into a 65,000 dimensional mathematical
space where the components finally have
enough room, enough dimension to
separate.
So now is the time that we go from 4,000
dimensions to 65,000 dimension in our
mathematical calculations. But now in
65,000 dimension, oh I can find all
these 10,000 human concepts and build a
space that maybe we are if we are lucky
we can have something like vectors after
operators. No, it turns out we are not
lucky. It's going to be a superposition
but never mind.
So what we have now in our sparse
autoenccoder at first we have to project
it from 4K to the 65dimensional thousand
dimensional space. So we project it up
to this 65,536
dimensional space. It is a sparse code.
And what is the meaning? We simply say
hey out of your 65,000 possible concepts
that you have not a space which I don't
know 30 concepts or 50 concepts are
active right now. If we think about the
word Monday or Tuesday or color or red
and then of course if we find it in this
high really high dimensional space we
have to decode. Now we have to bring it
back to the 4,000 dimensional space. The
decoder is also the dictionary also D.
So careful some person mix up the term
but it is the same. So this is
mathematically the projection matrix
that you are thinking of. It is exactly
the matrix here that is the 65,000 *
4,000 dimensional uh matrix and it takes
down those 50 active concepts that we
identified in this high dimensional
space. And now we have to the the
mathematical job to project it down to
the classical 4,000 dimensional space to
reconstruct now in the original state
the vector X. Remember we wanted to have
a clear uh buildup of the vector x in
our 4,000 dimensions. But now we can do
it here mathematically in a beautiful
and definitive form.
So this means our sparse autoenccoder
our tool that we use now really
constructs the original state by taking
now a linear combination of those
unitnorm dictionary atoms our DI
weighted by the scalar activation. This
is our classical activation. If we have
here our reasoning traces in the in
context learning in the prompt of an
transformer our Z eyes and it is simply
here sum over all set eyes I dis eyes
here of the active internal dimension
and then we have here the new uh if you
want a mathematical form of the state
vector X.
But now you see we have coming from a
65,000 dimensional overcomplete frame
vector representation our atoms
we have now so many possibilities that
now we have the luxury to choose here
particular pairs that fit best. We have
multiple freedoms degree of freedoms
here in building these systems.
But again the atom is a single row in
the decoder matrix D
and it is what mathematically speaking
simple it is as a row now a 4,000
dimensional vector and it lives in the
exact same room place as the state
vector. It builds it up. It is not an
state. careful because they are 65,000
atoms that are crammed into 4,000
dimension. So they cannot be orthogonal
subspaces.
So we have therefore as I told you here
an overcomplete frame vector
representation.
But this atom is exactly what we need.
Now an atom is simply an arbitrary
learned vector pointing somewhere inside
this 4,000 dimensional space. And the
sparse autoenccoder has learned that
let's say if it adds together a small
amount of atom number 10 then it takes
atom number 420 and a little bit of atom
1 1337 it can now perfectly recreate the
llm state vector and this is exactly
here the vector representation for our
human word Tuesday.
So you see it is not pure states but we
have something that now we understand
how to build it because the vector
dimensionality of the hidden vector
representation of the encoding of a
llama model is only in a 4,000
dimensional space.
Now in the good old times of AI no we
had the hope that this atom 420 let's
say would literally be a pure state in
this mathematical representation and
would literally be here the
representation of time be exact the
concept of time how we humans use it in
our human language no but now we find
out and this is the study of today the
concept of time to be specific is not a
straight arrow. It is not a simple
vector representation but it is itself a
curved object. It is a one-dimensional
manifold. And as I've showed you, let's
take the example of days. It is a
one-dimensional circle or a helix
representation if it encodes here the
number of the year 2025 2026.
And these are curved one-dimensional
manifolds that are woven into the
4,000dimensional mathematical space. And
now you understand that a single
straight atom cannot represent that
because it's a curved one-dimensional
manifold. And I will show you some
curved higher dimensional manifolds.
Those are the subspaces and those are
not ornal subspaces.
So the the hope that we had hey
everything is orthonormal everything is
separable and everything is that we have
here a beautiful mathematical system now
say goodbye to this simple mathematical
representation.
So we are operating now if you want to
understand how the concept of time is
represented in our blackbox AI we
understand this mathematical
representation in the eye is now a
curved one-dimensional manifold. This is
how the eye sees and operates and
computes whenever we say hey on Monday I
have to do this.
So this is here my nano banana pro uh
representation we have our black box.
No. And then we have here topological
objects here inside here the
representation how the AI handles this
internally. And as I told you the day
manifold here in blue is a
one-dimensional loop or as I told you
the years manifold how is the year
encoded here is a three-dimensional
helix structure here in yellow. So this
is now exactly how the mathematical
representation are stored inside the AI
and now we operate with this and now we
calculate with this topological objects.
Now you always see I have here this
dictionary and the dictionary atoms and
you see here those would have been our
in the perfect world here our straight
units now that we can build it. But if
you look here at a helix, you can't
reconstruct a helix here of straight
linear non-curved um objects. Yeah. So
therefore we go now to the mathematical
field of of topology differential
geometry and we will take the knowledge
from mathematics and bring it over into
AI because now we're going to talk about
the delusion regime the interaction and
we will use here a mathematical tool the
easing model that comes from particle
from multibody physics yeah in the
classical term.
Okay. So the optimization dynamics of
our sparse autoenccoder as I told you is
doing something beautifully you know
instead of trying to use the atom 420 to
represent the whole curved manifold of
the time representation inside the black
box of an eye the sparse autoenccoder
takes now let's go I don't know 30
different atoms and places them tangent
to the curve itself.
So we have a certain threedimensional
object and now if this is here this
curve you see we take now 30 of those
what is it pink arrows and really place
it every 1 cm. So you really get here
the idea. This helps us to build this
mathematical structure with the
simplification of a straight linear
error here.
And if we do this now in the
mathematical
correct form then we build here charts
and the charts that are tangent shell
build here into an atlas. We already
talked about this at the beginning of
the video. You see now we come back but
because the sparse audio encoder cannot
span the curvature globally using our
straight directional vectors it
autonomously and this is the beauty
constructs now an atlas. So somehow this
sparse order encoder is looking for a
mathematical methodology to come close
in the buildup here and it if you want
develops or discovers here hey let's do
this here in the differential topology
uh methodology of building an atlas from
our flat charts. So here is it. Now
because the geometry is locally linear
but globally nonlinear it is a
threedimensional helix. We must abandon
purely geometric similarity that we go
for in the uklitian space and look now
and operate now in a higher mathematical
space and use there our mathematical
knowledge from the topology. So
therefore we look at topological
intersection between our charts and here
you have here our manifold here whatever
this is and here and this blue line and
here you have now if you see here our
little pink arrows again now as you see
maybe they're a little bit curved maybe
we use a meta different mathematical
basis forget about it never mind but how
we can build it how we can build an
atlas here we have to build here a
tangent plane and this is here those
blue sheets that you see here and those
blue sheet are tangent here to our
manifold here and this blue sheet builds
here in the topology what we call a
local chart
there's a complete mathematical theory
it takes about one semester minimum if
you study the university mathematics
here or theical physics and you learn
this it's a tool that you learn really
over month and month and there's a
beauty and Yes, for the moment you just
have to believe me that we can do this
differential geometry atlas built here
in a neural network and this is the way
that we understand now just days ago two
days ago how the neural network in the
blackbox AI operates
and now of course you have this multiple
separated if you want shields no the
local charts
and now in mathematics you have the
problem. You see this orange glowing
things? No. Or here at the border when
two sheets come together, you have this
orange glow. This is not a question. If
there's a little bit of an overlap and
you need an overlap in mathematics and
you prove that there's an overlap, how
you do this? This is what the authors
call the delusion regime. What we in
mathematics call the overlapping
receptive fields. And we know this in
physics. We built this in physics. So
this is um a tool that we know. We just
applied now here an artificial
intelligence with our sparse
autoenccoder that we built in a
particular way. Now yeah then you can go
fully mathematically but no we just want
to have a look at the main idea.
So if you are handed now 65,000 random
local charts generated banner algorithm
in this particular space which do not
come with an instruction manual telling
you how to build the jigsaw puzzle here
together
and which chart belongs next to which
other chart given here particular
instances here everything is just total
chaos now
but as I told you the two of this sheets
of those tongue and to the charts
overlap on the manifold. So their
feature activations here will co-ire if
you think these are two neurons now and
both will fire if they have here the
data that they have been trained for. So
they will co- fire on the same data and
this is exactly where we have the
overlap of those local charts. Now we
can transform this topological problem
into a physical problem, a pure
mathematical physical problem. And we
have here the many body physics problem.
And again hundreds of years ago in
theoretical physics and mathematics they
found here a solution for this problem.
And now we use this. So you see we look
all around physics, mathematics and find
solution.
Okay. So to rebuild now the global
manifold dam our blue we have you have
to analyze here the transition maps. So
simp you simply have to figure out which
chart overlap in a neural network if two
charts overlap the atoms will
co-activate across the data set the
neurons will fire give them a particular
term and by fitting now the easing model
and this is just a tool if you want
think about this is a tool that we use
in theoretical physics theorists now are
mathematically computing here those
nonzero transition maps between the
local topological charts so This little
orange things here on the interface
between two maps. No, this is now where
we have the tool of the easing model
here in mathematics in physics and we
can calculate this in a beautiful way
but would take a day to explain this in
full mathematical beauty.
So this is now interesting. So what we
use now is not at all anymore ukitian
geometry but we use here everything that
we know here from topology from
theoretical physics from mathematics we
build dictionary atoms we operate here
in tangent vector spaces here that are
here clearly marked here to define the
concept manifold that we understand
where is the reasoning trace of the
blackbox AI. How is Blackbox AI handling
here terms like days or years or the
concept of time or the concept of color
or anything else
and with this methodology we see that we
can understand what's happening so great
so where are we so I just showed you
that we use a tiny little bit of
differential geometry the atom DI
becomes a local coordinate charge UI
forming then in total the manifold atlas
before and we use a little tiny bit of
statistical mechanics of physics. Its
binary activation state here becomes a
single spin
in the interacting easing latis model
that we use in theoretical physics. So
we just use a tool and we find it the
atlas.
So again we have our local sheet, we
have another sheet and now we cannot
operate here with our straight vectors,
our pink vectors that you see here.
And the real interesting thing is
happening if we have now this overlap
region that we built here from the
charts the atlas and this is a
mathematical non-trivial problem but we
can do it here and this little yellow
storm area that here nanobano probe was
so nice to paint for me is what we call
also here this function of the
transition map between our if you want
um local maps and in blue you have of Of
course here again the concept manifold
and in pink you have your dictionary
atoms or your dis and your local
coordinate chused
together
as I told you the neural network is not
an elegant mathematical connoisseur it's
a brutal optimizer trying to minimize a
loss function remember we are operating
here with transformer so when a state
vector x travels along the curve of our
concept manifold from the chart of 1910
let's say this is the chart of 1910 to
the chart of 1920 this is this blue
sheet here the neural network does not
cleanly switch from atom A this is here
our pink vector A to atom B this is here
this pink vector instead it enters here
the zone of heavy redundant overlap and
this is where the mathematics is not
trivial but we can handle it we have
tools and mathematical theory to
understand how to make it smoother
And if you pluck a single dictionary
atom out of that storm and you ask, hey,
what does this atom now mean by itself,
you will not get a a good answer because
a single atom only holds here a partial
semantic meaning. And now to explain
here the semantic complexity of the
human language, how it is mapped into
the blackbox of an AI, you understand?
We build here little helper planes in
the differential geometry in the in the
mathematical space and it has here only
a very particular semantic meaning. But
this vector is just a tiny piece of a
scaffolding that we need here to support
here in hundreds of sheets supporting
here in total the curve. And this M
concept manifold is for example our
one-dimensional ring for I don't know
the days of the week.
And this is how the mathematical
operations work. This is how the
blackboxi calculates.
I have this literature that I use and I
can recommend here. This is your
differential geometry from 2022
Cambridge part three.
Thank you to all the authors and who
took the notes and who whatever you find
it here. This is the link. This is here
from Berkeley. [laughter]
But there it's it's short, it's clear,
it is precise there. You can buy other
books, no problem. But if you just want
to go in the internet, so hey, this is
the link over there if you want to have
a deep dive really understand vector
bundles here, differential forms and so
on. This is some very simple but
complete mathematical beautiful thing.
The study of today that we already
solved here is exactly this one. I don't
know good fire but I know Harvard
University, Stanford University, Nor
Eastern University. You have your GitHub
page here and it is all about do sparse
autoenccoder capture concept manifolds.
Isn't this beautiful? Now in May 2026
we're trying to open the black box of AI
models of LLMs trying to understand hey
how are they really calculating
operating computing here
their probability transition and what is
here a manifold where are the vectors
that we operate with here our tenza
manifolds our tenza multiplication
where are they what symmetries do they
have in the mathematical space. How does
this combine at all to our mathematical
understanding here? What is AI doing?
Because it is a broken promise. No, as I
told you in the old good old days, no,
when the field of the mechanistic
interpretability of AI started, no, the
researcher made a massive optimistic
assumption. We have a onetoone mapping
hypothesis. No. So we believed in the
early days that if we train an SAA or
sparse autoenccoder with our 65,000
atoms here, our mathematical vector
representation,
hopefully each atom would lock onto
exactly one human idea, the color red.
What is the color? What what is the
meaning of a year? So one atom to one
concept and this was the hope and
everything would be here mathematically
pure and precise and state and
whatsoever as I showed you we hope that
atom number 10 for example in this post
autoenccoder representation would be for
uh I don't know llama mall here on the
level 19 would be exactly the concept of
red
now you know this is not true it is not
that easy because this paper now proves
that Using here this words atom and
concept interchangeably like it was done
for years is a fatal scientific error.
This is not how it's really happening
inside the black box of AI.
Color is a concept but color does not
map to a single discrete atom. Color is
a continuous physical property. As I
showed you here, we have U and lightness
and the LLM represents the concept of
color in a very particular way as a
two-dimensional paraboloid manifold
curving through the 4,96dimensional
space.
This is the concept of color,
not a single straight vector.
And therefore we now learn the concept
of whatever we have in the human
language is inside the black box. the
entire curved manifold
that was constructed given our
pre-training data sets where the model
was trained and after then postrained
concept entire curved manifold systems.
So by mapping this now to a
understanding of differential geometry
you realize now the truth the matrix D
our dictionary is not a list of 65,000
independent concept but it is simply as
we just I have tried to show you a
discretized tangent bundle this is
another mathematical term that is
absolutely defined in pure mathematical
terms and this is it
so we are Now discretized tang bundle.
This is not trivial. This is not
ukidian. This maybe if you're not into
physics and not into mathematics, you
have never seen this before in your
life. But this is the way that it
computes.
So we now recognize that the atom itself
is not the object of meaning of
reasoning itself. The atom is just the
local derivative the tangent of the
meaning of the r. And to understand now
the concept we must integrate now the
tangent here to find the curve. So we
retroengineer here our way to the real
understanding what is happening inside
the black box of ani.
So we can run this run this easing based
pipeline. Let's call it this here
backward. backward over the entire
65,000 dimensional sparse autoenccoded
dictionary to discover now all the
manifolds that we hope to discover color
time date year what is the meaning of
taste or whatever and we discover
manifolds that we even didn't know that
were there because guess what the AI
building up its quotation mark
intelligence in a 65 dn thousand
dimensional space did not just encode
put color and time and year but
everything else that it was fed with in
the pre-training data sets.
So the pipeline groped here an array of
seemingly random features and when you
analyze this now collective here they
revealed here the entire novel
continuous manifold encoding for example
something that we think is the epistemic
uncertainty
in scientific contexts.
So this means scaling continuously from
high certainty exact measurements to
high uncertainty.
So there is a particular manifold
where the eye when it is reading a
scientific article is understanding here
how much certainty is in this scientific
context that I read and how much
epistemic uncertainty is there and the
vector that is describing exactly this
property is running on a continuous
manifold in a 4,000 dimensional space if
you use a llama model. So if you had
looked at the dictionary vectors
individually,
you would have never seen if you would
have not integrated over everything that
they are higher order cognitive
structure in this fourdimensional vector
space. And now it gets interesting
because now
at least in my understanding I would say
wait a minute. So I have all the basic
simple manifolds that give me color and
time of date and year and whatever. But
something that I have not actually
programmed here in the pre-training data
set for the transformer learning. Yeah.
because now suddenly I see that the eye
started to build something like
uncertainty in scientific context.
So there are hm mark higher order
cognitive structures that are discovered
mathematically running this mathematical
process that I described in this video
that are suddenly appearing that were
not part of how do you say this our
original pre-training data set
they were a hidden pattern in the text
and the eye discovered this hidden
pattern and those are now high order
cognitive structure So if you want there
is an quotation mark emergence
of intelligent but it is not that we
have AGI or super intelligent. It is
just that mathematically in this process
here of our tangent space approximation
with topological interfaces,
we define or we see that there are now
some manifolds in the mathematical space
of the eye itself that we as humans
would call a higher order cognitive
structure. Like suddenly the term
uncertainty
lives on a manifold in an AI and this is
interesting but this is all the
intelligence that we have
here is now a screenshot from this paper
here from April 30.
So you have here the async pipeline
recovers here known manifolds
temperature color political bias here
those three examples here beautiful as
distinct feature communities that were
definitely here in the pre-training data
we had temperature we had color all
beautiful but then there's also here and
they just go with a PCA never mind here
and they discover something here mean
and standard deviation scientific data
tables or uncertainty and error margin
scientific data or quantitative
measurement ments in biomed research.
Suddenly they have here a cluster that
is here if you go with a PCA separation
here that is building out here some
terms that we understand and we say okay
in a higher dimensional term we can call
this if you want uncertainty in
scientific context.
So here we see or the authors tell us
that they detected here a novel manifold
encoding of epistemic uncertainty in
scientific context here demonstrating
here its utility for generating
hypothesis beyond known structure. So
this is now interesting.
This means that now with this
mathematical understanding we really
understand mathematically
why NEI is suddenly quotation mark
discovering new manifolds because
everything is manifold.
So this means in this fourdimensional
space if you're human you can do it. I'm
I don't know if I can do it. I have a
four-dimensional space and on this
fourdimensional space all the
topological elements from the thumbnail
of my video you have three or four live
there and the state vector of our system
that we calculate with are on this
particular manifold.
Okay, great.
All of this spectacular mathematical
machinery, the overcomplete frames that
we have, the peace-wise linear atlas
building from topology, the easing
Hamiltonians from theoretical physics,
no all of this is just to build for one
singular ultimate purpose of this video
to read the mind of this machine of this
AI and understand exactly how it weaves
here the human knowledge that we prepare
as a pre-training data set means the
copy of the internet for example into
the geometry of its own face space and
now you understand why one of my last
videos was about quantum AI because do
you see we go now last video were about
Hilbert space now we're in Mskovski
space if we want to continue to develop
artificial intelligence the next model
the next step in intelligence
we cannot stick here in the classical
ukidian theory we have to go to more
intelligent mathematics ical theorems.
We have to apply our understanding here
from real physical system and understand
the neural network is kind of a physical
system that we can apply our ideas from
entropy thermodynamic
spin glasses on this system describe
here a new mathematical reality.
Yeah, the mind of the machine is I think
a dynamic Minkovski space for this
approximation. The next one
approximation of highly curved
geometries. Say goodbye to vector vector
machine vector databases. Something else
will come up. Yeah. Our probes, our
sparse autoenccoder cannot flatten them.
No, they can only weave an atlas of
localized charts like I showed you this
orange intermingle
analog to a grid of a biological neurons
that we have also. No. And to actually
read the sorts of the machine within, we
must use the tool of many body physics.
here easing models here to map the
interacting latis of those neurons back
into the glorious continuous geometry
that they were trying to describe all
along means the black box of EI. So
suddenly we uncover and discover here
all the hidden mathematical procedures
that are happening really in an AI
system.
But it is not that simple because I
oversimplified here. Realizing that a
network built in atlas is not an easy
task. If you're not into mathematics, it
is you think it is simple but it is not.
And by using the easing model here to
glue that atlas back together, integrate
over it, you have to prove that you're
allowed to integrate. You have to have
certain boundary conditions and so on.
But okay, finally we have the true map
of the LLM's reality. So if we want now
to rewrite the machine's knowledge no or
mathematically guarantee now we in cyber
safety that any cannot access dangerous
concept deception or something you are
not you don't want the eye to do now
there's a whole research area where you
want to delete certain parts out of the
knowledge of an AI and up until now we
thought hey this is somewhere a vector
representation so we just cut out the
vector from here to here and hopefully
The vector that we are really interested
dangerous vector is really gone. It's
really eliminated. Yeah. Now we know we
cannot simply delete a fix feature
vector because now we understand we must
navigate this mathematical space real
careful and then really potentially
extremely careful extract here
anti-topological manifolds because it is
not an ukitian vector representation. So
our AI researcher have to get a lot more
intelligent, a lot more clever than they
are currently. So if you study currently
mathematics or physics, beautiful,
you're on the right track because the
next idea, the next generation is not
about how to code something, but how to
think about it and how to develop the
next generation. And therefore, you need
a deep deep understanding how you can
think about it and have a feeling for
it.
So you just have seen here the blueprint
of how a human logic that we now apply
to an LLM is if you want crystallized
into a highdimensional geometry of our
topological elements that I showed you
no and you have seen that the different
elements here of physics we must apply
the different theorems the different
easing models the different latice
structures to measure and hopefully
sometimes even control it. But this is
okay. This is great because every time
we see that something fails, we
understand that we have to improve. We
have to improve our mathematical
understanding. We have to improve the
complexity of our tools that if we open
here, crack open here the black box of
AI. It's not a ukitian tool anymore. It
has to be a very specific tool set that
we use here. So great. So therefore if
you want summary before we do the
summary this one here again how does a
neural network understand how the
concept of time that we as humans
articulate in our language and we
provide you the pre-training data here
for a GPT system how is time now
computed in the blackbox so to encode
this higher order relation here this is
a cyclical progression the network
physically wraps its internal coordinate
system it rearranges the coordinate
vector of the days of the week. So that
the distant matrix between them
perfectly mirrors here the human logic.
It forms a one-dimensional circles or it
encode years. It forms a
three-dimensional helix structure. But
what it really means and what you have
to feel get a feeling for is it is the
topology of this particular manifold
that is the logic of the relation in our
human language. So it turns out damn
this blackbox AI is doing a lot of
mathematics beautifully.
Okay, at the end of the video if you are
still with me and maybe there's still
one person on the planet or that is
still with me at this very particular
time. The summary
an LLM activation vector you know for
the reasoning process for the long chain
of thought reasoning that we talk about
is if you want if you look now in a
different frame of theoretical physics
is a particle moving through a composite
space of multiple superpos geometric
manifolds. This is what we operating in
and our interpretability tool, our
element that we use to go deeper into
this dark space of an AI, the sparse
autoenccoder lacks the curvature to
capture these manifolds directly.
You remember the planet the surface of
the planet earth here a sphere and we
try and have only a flat plane doesn't
work but we have the mathematical
theorem to make it work. So therefore
instead sparse order autoenccoder
dynamically weaves now an atlas of local
linear charts.
So it does understand it. It just needs
a little bit of mathematics and then
reverse engineer the eye. We cannot just
examine here the individual charts. We
must stitch them together. Computational
stitch the atlas together to finally
reveal the topology of the machine's
mind. And now we have achieved our goal.
Now we understand how the reasoning a
process in an artificial AI is really
computed. What is the real mathematics
behind it? And we understand immediately
cyber security is going to be much much
harder to control than we thought about.
It is not what all the expert told you a
simple vector extraction or if you want
to delete some knowledge [clears throat]
out of an EI system.
You can't do this just with a vector
algebra because everything is in if you
want encoded here in curved higher
dimensional manifolds.
So the complexity changed completely but
finally we have a window that we
understand here the inner working of the
machine mind of artificial intelligence.
I hope you enjoyed the video. There was
some new information. Maybe you're
interested. If you want to read the
study yourself, have a look. This was
just the introduction. The study itself
is much more heavier on the mathematical
side. But I wanted to give you here a
little bit of a motivation of a joy that
you say, okay, I jump now into
mathematics. I want to read the study. I
want to really understand this. And
there you see where Stanford and Harvard
and all the different researcher are
currently thinking about, hey, how is
NEI actually working? I hope to see you
in my next video.